doc: add doc of functional dependency (#33164)
pingcap/tidb: docs/design/2022-03-16-functional-dependency.md

## Detail Design

### Implementation Overview

* How to store function dependency
* How to maintain function dependency
* How to integrate function dependency with TiDB arch

#### How to store function dependency

Generally speaking, functional dependencies essentially store the relationship between columns. According to paper [CS-2000-11.thesis.pdf](https://cs.uwaterloo.ca/research/tr/2000/11/CS-2000-11.thesis.pdf), this relationship can be constant, equivalence, strict and lax. Except constant is a unary, all others can be regarded as binary relationships. Therefore, we can use graph theory to store functional dependencies, maintaining edge sets between point-set and point-set, and attaching equivalence, strict and lax attributes as a label on each edge. For unary constant property, we can still save it as an edge, and since constant has no starting point-set, let's regard it as a headless edge.

* equivalence: {a} == {b}
* strict FD:   {a} -> {b}
* lax FD:      {a} ~> {b}
* constant:    { } -> {b}

> For computation convenience, we can optimize equivalence as {a,b} == {a,b}, so we don't have to search for the both direction side when confirming whether a point is in the equivalence set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For computation convenience, we can optimize equivalence as {a,b} == {a,b}, so we don't have to search from both directions when confirming whether a point is in the equivalence set.
```

Author: thanks, good

#### How to maintain function dependency

> For open-sourced mysql, the construction and maintenance of FD is still relatively heavy. It uses sub-queries as logical units and uses nested methods to recursively advance FD. For each logical unit, the source for where FD is derived is relatively simple, basically from three elements there: group-by, where-clause and datasource(join/table). However, according to the paper [CS-2000-11.thesis.pdf](https://cs.uwaterloo.ca/research/tr/2000/11/CS-2000-11.thesis.pdf), TiDB chooses to build FDs based on logical operators as an alternative, without the boundary restrictions of logical sub-queries. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the open-sourced MySQL, the construction and maintenance of FD are still relatively heavy. It uses sub-queries as logical units and uses nested methods to recursively advance FD. For each logical unit, the source for where FD is derived is relatively simple, basically from three elements there: the `GROUP BY` clause, the `WHERE` clause and the datasource (join/table). However, according to the paper [CS-2000-11.thesis.pdf](https://cs.uwaterloo.ca/research/tr/2000/11/CS-2000-11.thesis.pdf), TiDB chooses to build FDs based on logical operators as an alternative, without the boundary restrictions of logical sub-queries. 
```

Example:

```sql
create table t1(a int, c int)
create table t2(a int, b int)

> select t1.a from t1 join t2 on t2.a=t1.a group by t2.a where c=1;

Reviewer: What's the purpose of this SQL? It's different from the below one.

Author: Ahaaa, a mistake, >.<

> select t1.a from t1 join t2 on t2.a=t1.a group by t2.a where c=1;

Reviewer: What's the purpose of this SQL? It's different from the below one.

+----------------------------------+----------+-----------+---------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
9 rows in set (0.00 sec)
```

Analysis:

When building the FD through these logical operators, we are calling a function of ExtractFD recursively from the root node of the logical plan tree. When the call down to the leaf node (actually source table for both join side), for the inner side, the FD from the datasource of base table of t2 are nil because they have no basic key constraint. While for outer side, since there is a filter on the datasource of base table t1, we got FD as {} -> {t1.c}. Because t1.c can only be constant 1 behind the filter. Up to next level, the join condition t1=t2 will build the equivalence for point-set of {t1.a, t2.a} == {t1.a, t2.a}. Finally, when arriving the root aggregate node, we will build strict FD from group-by point-set {t2.a} to select aggregate function {count(t2.b)} reasonably. Consequently, we get FD as {} -> {t1.c} & {t1.a, t2.a} == {t1.a, t2.a} & {t2.a} -> {count(t2.b)}.

Application:

> For the only-full-group-check of building phase, after getting the FD as illustrated in the last subchapter, we can easily identify the select list that t1.a are equivalent to the group-by column t2.a, count(t2.b) are strictly functional dependent on group-by column t2.a and t.c are definitely constant after the filter is passed. So only full group check is valid here. For more sophisticated cases with recursive sub-queries, maintenance work of this kind of FD architecture will be automatically and reasonable when we're just pulling the request from the top node of the entire logical plan tree, all things are naturally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the only-full-group-by check of building phase, after getting the FD as illustrated in the last subchapter, we can easily identify from the select list that t1.a are equivalent to the group-by column t2.a, count(t2.b) are strictly functional dependent on group-by column t2.a and t.c are definitely constant after the filter is passed. So it can pass the only-full-group-by check here. For more sophisticated cases with recursive sub-queries, maintenance work of this kind of FD architecture will be automatical and reasonable when we're just pulling the request from the top node of the entire logical plan tree, all things happen naturally.
```

For outer join, we need to consider more, because outer join will choose the connection method based on the position of the join conditions and the presence of the join key.

* only inner side condition           --- apply inner filter after the cartesian product is made, which means no supplied-null row will be appended on the inner side.
* has outer condition or join key     --- apply all of this filter as matching judgement on the process of cartesian product, which means supplied-null row will be appended on the inner side when matching is failed.

both cases will keep all rows from the outer side, but the time to apply the filter depends on where the conditions come from, which leading whether append the null rows on the inner side. So what's the big deal between this two? the former one can be seen as a inner join, but the later can only keep the FD from the outer side join, inner side's FD and filter FD has many complicated rules to infer with, we are not going to expand all of this here.

## Investigation

> - [mysql source code](https://github.com/mysql/mysql-server/blob/8.0/sql/aggregate_check.h)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [MySQL source code](https://github.com/mysql/mysql-server/blob/8.0/sql/aggregate_check.h)
```
